From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bubaro. This is the Daily.
[Music]
By almost all accounts, the historic
trade deal that was just reached between
the United States and the 27 nations of
the European Union is far better for the
US than it is for Europe.
Today, my colleague, Brussels Bureau
Chief Gina Smiling on why the EU caved
to President Trump and the blowback that
it's causing.
[Music]
[Applause]
It's Tuesday, July 29th.
[Music]
Gina, always a pleasure.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> You know, it occurs to me that, Gina,
when two sides reach any kind of major
deal, they usually find a way to tout
it, to celebrate it, even if they don't
exactly like it. And that's not exactly
what's happening on the European side of
this enormous trade deal that was just
reached between Europe and the US.
>> No, that is very much not what is
happening on the European side of this
trade deal. I think the most optimistic
takes we're hearing are things like,
well, gee, this could have been worse.
And the most
>> not exactly a ringing endorsement.
>> No, not at all.
This is a humiliating capitulation on
behalf of the EU and it really calls
into question this amazing negotiating
strain that the EU was supposed to
exert.
>> And the most pessimistic things we're
hearing are this was a political
capitulation. This is a shame for
Europe.
>> It's not a win for anybody. It's a
miserable deal.
>> I'm appalled. I'm I'm absolutely
appalled. I mean,
>> and one quote was, "It's a dark day when
an alliance of free peoples gathered to
affirm their values and defend their
interests resolves to submit."
>> And that one was from the French prime
minister. So, so very negative reviews,
>> right? One of the leaders of France just
basically accused all of Europe of
submission to President Trump.
>> Yes. And it wasn't just the French
complaining about this. We saw it coming
from the Belgians. We saw it coming from
analysts. We saw it coming sort of
across the board. There were a lot of
complaints about this deal.
>> It really makes you wonder what is it
actually doing for its member states.
It's a real failure on the part of the
European Commission in negotiating here.
[Music]
And just explain what's behind these
dramatic, somewhat abashed, embarrassed,
even ashamed reactions from some of
these European officials. why this does
appear to them to be so bad for the
European Union.
>> I think it's really a matter of this
deal looking a lot worse in the details
than what had been expected for a long
time. Europe is, depending on how you
measure it, either the world's second or
third largest economy with a huge
trading relationship with the United
States. And for a long time, European
Union officials thought that that would
give them some amount of leverage when
negotiating with the Trump
administration. Mhm.
>> And what they discovered is actually
they ended up having a much more
difficult time than they they had
expected and they had to accept a worse
deal than I think that they had thought
they would even as recently as a month
or a few weeks ago.
>> Mhm. And just take us on a very quick
spin through the important numbers that
reflect the worse than they expectedness
of this.
>> Yeah. The big number is 15%. which is
the acrosstheboard tariff rate that the
Trump administration has agreed to here
which would apply to about 70% of all
European Union goods being sent to the
United States
>> and that is up from what
>> that is up from the low single digits
depending on how you measure it coming
into this year and it is pretty
dramatically higher than what Europe had
expected that they were going to arrive
at. So, at first Europe was hoping that
they could negotiate Trump back down to
those low single digits. And then even
up until a few weeks ago, they were
hoping that they could get him to 10%.
They were hoping that 10% would be the
prevailing tariff rate. And so 15% is
not a particularly good outcome.
>> But just to ask the obvious question,
why has Europe agreed, submitted, in the
words of this French prime minister, to
a trade agreement that almost none of
them seem to really like? I think there
are two really big forces that argued
for them to make a deal and for them to
make this deal now. The first is that
they were increasingly worried that this
could turn into a real tariff trade war
spiral.
>> And I think that that was not initially
on their radar in the way that it
ultimately became on their radar going
into this. If you rewind to Liberation
Day, April 2nd, that day when President
Trump stood out in the Rose Garden with
his poster saying what the across the
board tariff rates were going to be on
different economies. Back then, European
Union officials really thought that they
could negotiate down their across the
board tariff rate, which was 20% as of
liberation day.
>> Right
>> then those negotiations did not go well
and President Trump threatened to slap
them with 50% tariffs, but he backed off
of that relatively quickly. And so I
think they thought that they could still
negotiate down. And then you get up
until very recently when President Trump
was threatening Europe with 30%. And
just as these threats kept rolling in
and as he kept doubling down on them, it
became more obvious to Europe that he
was pretty serious about them. And a
tariff rate around 30% would absolutely
have crushed transatlantic trade.
European Union officials were really
clear about that.
And so I think they got increasingly
worried that if they retaliated, they
might just poke the bear.
>> President Trump might still double down.
It could just result in this spiraling
situation where they're retaliating, the
administration is reacting, and that it
would both cost jobs here in Europe and
also potentially crush an economy that
has been growing but not growing very
quickly.
>> Interesting. So, at some point in the
kind of yo-yoing of Trump's position,
which starts off very firm and then
there's a pause and sometimes it feels
like he's backing down, but then he's
back up with an even higher threat. At
some point, European Union officials say
to themselves, "This is becoming real."
Even if it's very unpredictable and
maybe because it's becoming so
unpredictable, we now fear that the
worst version of this is going to become
our reality.
>> Yes. Or a very extreme version of this.
I think there was this growing
recognition the Trump administration was
really willing to inflict some serious
pain to achieve their trade goals.
>> Mhm. I'm just curious what an example
would be of the pain that they most
feared.
>> Yeah. So I think the most specific and
clear example might be the
pharmaceutical sector. And so
pharmaceuticals typically not tariffed
because these are really important
potentially life-saving medicines that
consumers need. But President Trump has
opened an investigation into the global
pharmaceutical industry. He's been very
clear that he wants to bring some of it
back to the United States and he has
been threatening to put potentially
really huge tariffs on this industry.
He's thrown out numbers like 200%.
>> Wow.
>> That would be a very big deal for Europe
because pharmaceuticals and the
chemicals related to them are the number
one export that the EU sends to America.
And so this was a real point of concern
and I think it was one that became more
and more salient because you were seeing
the pharmaceutical companies really
warning that if big tariffs hit they
might have to pick up and move
operations to the United States. You
were seeing pharmaceutical companies
trying to stockpile product in the
United States to try and sort of
mitigate disaster if this actually came
to pass. And so I think it just became
as the months wore on more and more real
that this might happen. And that was
sort of an example of the kind of
cautionary tale, the kind of, you know,
reworking of economic relationships that
really started to catch people's
attention.
>> Mhm.
>> We've already started to see a lot of
pain in the automotive sector. Um, so
obviously American consumers are
probably very familiar with German car
makers. You know, the BMWs, the
Mercedes-Benzes of the world, they were
staring down pretty serious tariff
rates. And that if those had continued
for a really long time could have been
very damaging to their business. And so
I think there was also a very you know
intense push by the German car makers
and by car makers in general to try and
come to some kind of deal to make it a
little bit less punishing and certainly
to increase the certainty around what
terrorists were going to look like.
>> Right. You said that there was a second
reason beyond fear of economic trauma
from the US towards European Union
countries. So what was that?
>> Yeah, and I think this one is actually
the more surprising one, but there have
been all of these other issues that have
become sort of bundled up into this
trade war that are typically thought of
as pretty unrelated to trade. So things
like defense, things like the America's
involvement in NATO, things like
America's support for the war in
Ukraine, the other parts of the
transatlantic relationship became very
much tied up in this trade war. And the
idea that if you ended up in a huge
trade battle and if you ended up with
really really rapidly declining
relationships between the United States
and the European Union, all of these
really important geopolitical strategic
priorities could get caught up in that
mess. H in other words, EU trade
officials began to feel like they
couldn't disentangle doing a deal on
tariffs with the US from getting what
they want from President Trump when it
comes to arms for Ukraine or ongoing
commitments to NATO. And so they decide,
let's do this deal because it will make
everything else we're negotiating with
the Trump administration easier.
>> Yeah. And they've been really explicit
about that. So Maro Sevkovich, who is
the European Union Trade Commissioner,
told reporters on Monday explicitly that
it's not only about trade, it's about
security, it's about Ukraine, it's about
current geopolitical volatility.
>> So you really kind of can't get more
blunt than that. Like he he was saying
that this deal is not just about trade
anymore,
>> right? And primarily what he seems to be
saying and what you seem to be saying is
this was about fear. And just to
summarize what appears to have happened
here, President Trump spooked the
European Union. these 27 countries that
collectively operate as one economic
unit on a variety of fronts, military,
diplomatic, economic, and this spooked
EU decides to give the president more or
less most of what he wants in the
biggest trade deal that he has gotten so
far. And that's how you get to a 15%
tariff deal that most European leaders
don't really like. Yeah, I think that's
right. I think even the fact that they
emphasized so clearly that this was the
biggest deal, that they kind of helped
him to advertise this in very Trumpian
language kind of speaks to the fact that
they were really in sort of appeasement
mode here.
>> Okay. Well, when we come back, we're
going to talk about what this pretty
lopsided deal means precisely on the
ground for both sides. what Europe gave
up and what the US seems to have gotten.
And we'll be right back.
[Music]
So Gina, let's talk about what exactly
Europe gave up here. Clearly, we've
established that almost every industry
is now going to be paying 15%. So let's
talk about what that is going to mean,
its impact, and other things in this
deal that stand out as being tough for
Europe to swallow.
>> So I think the first most important
thing to really sort of digest is what
that 15% tariff that's going to apply to
70% of European goods will mean in
practice. And what it will mean in
practice is that products that are being
sold into the American market are going
to become a little bit less competitive
visav things that are comparable and are
produced by American producers.
>> And so I think a good example assuming
that it doesn't end up having an
exemption applied to it in the next
couple of days could be a bottle of
Italian Keianti.
>> You're selling Keianti into the American
market now. It's competing with some
nice wines from California and suddenly
it is 15% more expensive assuming the
entire tariff is passed along to the
consumer, right? And so we're looking at
a situation where European producers are
going to have a slightly tougher time
selling into the US market. That could
also apply for things like cars.
Suddenly, depending on how things play
out, your BMW or your Mercedes-Benzes
are going to be a little bit more
expensive to get into America than they
previously would have been.
>> Mhm. Now, on the flip side, Europe is
giving more favorable terms of trade to
some American companies that are sending
products here into Europe. And so, cars
are another good example, just to sort
of follow along that line. They are now
going to be subject to 0% tariffs coming
into Europe.
>> Wow. American cars will be imported into
Europe with zero tariffs, whereas
European cars imported into the US will
be hit with 15% tariffs.
>> Yes. And so European cars are getting a
little less competitive within the
United States market at the same time
that American cars are getting more
competitive within the European market.
>> I'm just trying to understand why Europe
would agree to terms like that for cars.
That would suggest that there has been a
pretty serious existing imbalance, trade
deficit within the car industry with way
more
European cars being brought into the
American market than American cars being
brought into the European market. Is
that the case?
>> It is the case that Americans buy more
European cars than Europeans buy
American cars. And it is also the case
that prior to this year, there were
slightly higher tariffs on American cars
coming into Europe, especially if you
count in trucks, than there were on
European cars coming into America. So
those things are true. This reversal is
bigger than an offset. And I think that
the reason that this industry became
such an important issue here is really
that it's one that President Trump has
been fixated on. He really cares about
this. a lot of times when he's in
Europe, he'll remark on the fact that
there are no American cars on European
streets, you know,
>> right?
>> He's not seeing Fords on the streets of
Munich. And so I think that that is part
of the reason that this became sort of
one of the sort of swapperoos, if you
will, in this deal is that it was
something that President Trump found
very salient.
>> Okay. So beyond giving a boost to
American car manufacturing,
how else does this deal benefit the
American side of the ledger?
>> So we have heard from the Europeans that
they are going to drop tariffs to very
low rates or potentially even zero on a
couple of products. We don't have the
exhaustive list yet. They haven't
published it, but it's going to be
potentially industrial goods, so things
like machinery. And then we are also
hearing that it could be things like
frozen seafood and lobsters. Don't know
who in the lobster lobby managed to pull
that off, but um but yeah. So
>> what is more American than a main
lobster though?
>> Yeah. Well, main lobsters coming to a
Berlin bar near you
>> without a tariff.
>> Without a tariff. And then we are also
expecting some investments that the EU
has reportedly pledged to make and that
Trump made a really big deal out of when
he was announcing the deal. For one
thing, there is going to be $750 billion
dollars in investments in energy over
the next three years.
>> That's real money if it's if it's real.
>> Yeah. Big headline numbers, big
questions about exactly how that's going
to play out. The European Union as such
does not have the ability to just make
those kinds of purchases. That's
something that would happen at the
member state levels and the EU can't
necessarily force their hands when it
comes to making such purchases and so
some serious questions about how that
part would work.
>> Okay. So now that we understand the ways
in which this deal clearly benefits the
US considerably and disadvantages Europe
considerably, I want to understand how
it fits into President Trump's goals for
this second term trade war. And really,
he's laid out two main objectives in
each negotiation. to have a fairer trade
relationship with whoever the trading
partner is, Japan, China, EU, and to
encourage more American manufacturing
through these trade deals.
On those two scores, how should we think
about what the US and the EU just agreed
to? Is it making trade fundamentally
fairer than it had been between the
United States and the 27 countries of
the EU? and is it likely to spur more
manufacturing in the US?
>> So, I'm gonna leave the question of
fairness aside, but it is definitely the
case that for years the European Union
has sold more to American consumers than
European consumers have bought from
American producers. And I think all else
equal, you would assume that this would
slightly rebalance that. I think it's
also the case that American consumers
spend a little more and European
consumers spend a little less. So, I'm
not going to pretend that this is just
going to completely change that
relationship overnight.
>> On the question of whether this brings
manufacturing back to the United States,
15% is probably not a prohibitive
tariff. It's probably not going to be
the thing that, you know, causes company
X to decide tomorrow that it needs to up
and move to Syracuse. But I think that
at the same time, if you're a company
and you've just lived through this
really uncertain tariff period and you
think there's a possibility that the
Americans could do this again or that
this uncertainty could last into the
future or that, you know, this is not
the end of the story, maybe if you're
thinking about expanding, you're a
little bit more likely to set up shop
somewhere in the United States where you
are shielded from some of those
concerns,
>> right? But I think it's important to
emphasize and I think the European Union
would emphasize that this comes at some
cost to Americans, right? When we talk
about tariffs, they are fundamentally a
tax and somebody's got to pay that tax.
And what we know from historical tariff
experience is that that tends to be the
end consumer, which in this case is the
American consumer. Of course, what
President Trump would say is if he's
doing this right, and the European maker
of Ozmpic, for example, decides that its
next factory should be in Syracuse, New
York, or Atlanta, Georgia, then American
manufacturing just gains some new jobs,
and the people buying that OMIC are not
going to be hit with that 50% tariff.
Yeah, you could theoretically think that
might happen over time, but in the
interim, you've got that 15% tariff on
the Ozmpic that's coming into the
country from Europe. And so I think that
the point that this is not costless is
still worth emphasizing.
>> Got it. So Gina, looking ahead, do we
think that 15% tariffs are likely to be
the template for the next few deals that
the president wants to achieve with
countries that haven't reached deals
with the US? I know that so far he has
reached a deal with the UK, a very close
ally for 10% tariffs. That's another
framework. It's not yet fully in force.
With Vietnam, it was a 20% tariff. Japan
was 15% and now we have 15% with the EU.
Should we expect 15% or so to be the
template for the rest of the deals with
the rest of the world?
>> Yeah. So, President Trump indicated on
Monday in Scotland that something in the
range of 15 to 20% could basically be
the template that we could see that
applying pretty broadly. And so, I think
that's interesting because it is not as
punishing as some of the worst rates
that he had been threatening, but it's
also obviously going to be a big step up
for many economies that were facing much
lower tariffs than that. And so, we're
going to have to wait and see how all of
that plays out. It's going to be
difficult to predict, especially because
all of these changes are taking place at
the same time, which would make them a
little bit harder to understand. You
have to think about how they interact
with one another. But I think that the
upshot here is we would see a pretty
significant change in the global trading
system.
>> And that's where I think I want to end
this conversation by assessing exactly
where we are in Trump's second term
trade war. And I think if we're being
honest, it began on Liberation Day with
a fair amount of snickering from foreign
ministers, from domestic economists,
from political observers who saw his
tariff strategy this time as fickle and
volatile. And there was a sense that the
White House was perhaps a little out of
its depth in this trade war. And yet,
here come the deals, especially the EU
deal. And it's a capitulation from the
other side and what looks like a victory
for President Trump and suggests that
his strategy which might have looked
chaotic from the outside has been quite
effective.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think, you know, having
covered this closely for several months
now, the strategy was chaotic. But I
think this idea that just because it was
chaotic meant it wouldn't ultimately
achieve what President Trump was trying
to achieve, maybe was a misreading. And
so, we're still in the process of
finalizing these deals. They could still
fall apart. But it does certainly seem
to be the case that President Trump is
getting many things that he had asked
for. And we've really heard from
officials including Marose Sephovich,
the EU trade commissioner who I had
mentioned earlier, this idea that April
2nd, that liberation day was sort of
this turning point.
You know, that we're not going back to
the world as it was before April 2nd.
This is a new world and we need to
adjust to it
>> and adjust to what Trump wants when it
comes to trade
>> at least to some extent. Yeah.
>> Well, you know, thank you very much. We
appreciate it.
>> Thank you for having me.
[Music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
On Monday, President Trump broke with
the leader of Israel, Benjamin
Netanyahu, by acknowledging the
starvation in Gaza, a subject that until
now Trump has largely ignored.
>> Prime Minister Netanyahu said there's no
starvation in Gaza. Do you agree with
that assessment?
>> I don't know. I mean, based on
television, I would say not particular.
This those children look very hungry.
As he spoke, Trump stood next to British
Prime Minister Kier Starmer, who said
that the people of the United Kingdom
were horrified by the scenes out of
Gaza.
>> It's an absolute catastrophe. Nobody
wants to see that. And I think uh people
in Britain are revolted at seeing what
they're seeing on their screens. So,
>> Meanwhile, two of Israel's best known
human rights groups said that Israel was
committing genocide against the people
of Gaza. It marked the first time that
major groups inside of Israel have
reached that conclusion.
And a gunman with an assault rifle has
killed multiple people, including a
police officer, in a Midtown Manhattan
office building. The shooting occurred
at around 6:30 p.m. inside a building
that houses the National Football League
and the financial firm Blackstone, whose
workers built a barricade of couches to
protect themselves from the shooter. As
of Monday night, the shooter's motives
and target remained unclear.
Today's episode was produced by Diana
Wyn and Michelle Banja. It was edited by
MJ Davis Lynn and Lisa Chow, contains
original music by Dan Powell and Marian
Lozano, and was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley. Our theme music is by Jim
Brunberg and Ben Lansf of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Bavaro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]